Add mqtt valve platform (#30344)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_integrations/valve.mqtt.markdown

---
title: "MQTT Valve"
description: "Instructions on how to integrate MQTT valves into Home Assistant."
ha_category:
  - Valve
ha_iot_class: Configurable
ha_release: 2024.1
ha_domain: mqtt
---

The `mqtt` valve platform allows you to control an MQTT valve (such a gas or water valve).

## Configuration

> A valve entity can be in states (`open`, `opening`, `closed` or `closing`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A valve entity can be have the following states: `open`, `opening`, `closed` or `closing`.
```

### Valve controlled by states

> If a `state_topic` is configured, the entity's state will be updated only after an MQTT message is received on `state_topic` matching `state_open`, `state_opening`, `state_closed` or `state_closing`. Commands configured through `payload_open`, `payload_closed` and `payload_stop` will be published to `command_topic` to control the valve.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a `state_topic` is configured, the entity's state will be updated only after an MQTT message is received on `state_topic` matching `state_open`, `state_opening`, `state_closed` or `state_closing`. Commands configured through `payload_open`, `payload_closed`, and `payload_stop` will be published to `command_topic` to control the valve.
```

To use your MQTT valve in your installation, add the following to your `configuration.yaml` file:

```yaml
# Example configuration.yaml entry for a value that is set by open or close command
mqtt:
  - valve:
      command_topic: "home-assistant/valve/set"
      state_topic: "home-assistant/valve/state"
```

### Valve controlled by position

> If the valve supports to report its position (The `reports_position` config option should be set to `true`). In that case a numeric state is expected on `state_topic`, but state updates are still allowed for `state_opening` and `state_closing`. Also a JSON format is supported and will also allow both `state` and `position` to be reported together.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the valve supports reporting its position (the `reports_position` config option is set to `true`), a numeric state is expected on `state_topic`, but state updates are still allowed for `state_opening` and `state_closing`. Also, a JSON format is supported. It allows both `state` and `position` to be reported together.
```

Example of a JSON state update:

```json
{"state": "opening", "position": 10}
```

> The wanted position value or `payload_stop` will be published to `command_topic` to control the valve when services `valve.open`, `value.close` or `value.set_position` are called.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The wanted position value or `payload_stop` will be published to `command_topic` to control the valve when the services `valve.open`, `value.close`, or `value.set_position` are called.
```

To use your MQTT valve in your installation, add the following to your `configuration.yaml` file:

```yaml
# Example configuration.yaml entry for a valve that reports position
mqtt:
  - valve:
      command_topic: "home-assistant/valve/set"
      state_topic: "home-assistant/valve/state"
      reports_position: true
```

### Optimistic operation

> If a `state_topic` is not defined, the valve will work in optimistic mode. In this mode, the valve will immediately change state (`open` or `closed`) after every command sent by Home Assistant and not wait for an update from the device. Optimistic mode can be forced, even if a `state_topic` is defined by setting `optimistic` to `true`. Try to enable it if experiencing incorrect valve operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a `state_topic` is not defined, the valve will work in optimistic mode. In this mode, the valve will immediately change state (`open` or `closed`) after every command sent by Home Assistant. It won't wait for an update from the device. Optimistic mode can be forced, even if a `state_topic` is defined by setting `optimistic` to `true`. Try to enable it if you are experiencing incorrect valve operation.
```

> If a `state_topic` is not defined, the valve will work in optimistic mode. In this mode, the valve will immediately change state (`open` or `closed`) after every command sent by Home Assistant. It won't wait for an update from the device. Optimistic mode can be forced, even if a `state_topic` is defined by setting `optimistic` to `true`. Try to enable it if you are experiencing incorrect valve operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a `state_topic` is not defined, the valve will work in optimistic mode. In this mode, the valve will immediately change state (`open` or `closed`) after every command sent by Home Assistant. It won't wait for an update from the device. Optimistic mode can be forced by setting `optimistic` to `true`, even if a `state_topic` is defined. Try to enable it if you are experiencing an incorrect valve operation.
```

{% configuration %}
availability:
  description: "A list of MQTT topics subscribed to receive availability (online/offline) updates. Must not be used together with `availability_topic`."
  required: false
  type: list
  keys:
    payload_available:
      description: The payload that represents the available state.
      required: false
      type: string
      default: online
    payload_not_available:
      description: The payload that represents the unavailable state.
      required: false
      type: string
      default: offline
    topic:
      description: An MQTT topic subscribed to receive availability (online/offline) updates.
      required: true
      type: string
    value_template:

>       description: "Defines a [template](/docs/configuration/templating/#using-templates-with-the-mqtt-integration) to extract device's availability from the `topic`. To determine the devices's availability result of this template will be compared to `payload_available` and `payload_not_available`."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      description: "Defines a [template](/docs/configuration/templating/#using-templates-with-the-mqtt-integration) to extract the device's availability from the `topic`. To determine the devices's availability, the result of this template will be compared to `payload_available` and `payload_not_available`."
```

      required: false
      type: template
availability_mode:
  description: When `availability` is configured, this controls the conditions needed to set the entity to `available`. Valid entries are `all`, `any`, and `latest`. If set to `all`, `payload_available` must be received on all configured availability topics before the entity is marked as online. If set to `any`, `payload_available` must be received on at least one configured availability topic before the entity is marked as online. If set to `latest`, the last `payload_available` or `payload_not_available` received on any configured availability topic controls the availability.
  required: false
  type: string
  default: latest
availability_template:

>   description: "Defines a [template](/docs/configuration/templating/#using-templates-with-the-mqtt-integration) to extract device's availability from the `availability_topic`. To determine the devices's availability result of this template will be compared to `payload_available` and `payload_not_available`."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description: "Defines a [template](/docs/configuration/templating/#using-templates-with-the-mqtt-integration) to extract the device's availability from the `availability_topic`. To determine the devices's availability, the result of this template will be compared to `payload_available` and `payload_not_available`."
```

  required: false
  type: template
availability_topic:

>   description: "The MQTT topic subscribed to to receive birth and LWT messages from the MQTT valve device. If an `availability` topic is not defined, the valve availability state will always be `available`. If an `availability` topic is defined, the valve availability state will be `unavailable` by default. Must not be used together with `availability`."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description: "The MQTT topic subscribed to receive birth and <abbr title="last will and testament">LWT</abbr> messages from the MQTT valve device. If an `availability` topic is not defined, the valve availability state will always be `available`. If an `availability` topic is defined, the valve availability state will be `unavailable` by default. Must not be used together with `availability`."
```

>   description: "The MQTT topic subscribed to receive birth and <abbr title="last will and testament">LWT</abbr> messages from the MQTT valve device. If an `availability` topic is not defined, the valve availability state will always be `available`. If an `availability` topic is defined, the valve availability state will be `unavailable` by default. Must not be used together with `availability`."

Reviewer 2: Or this one

Reviewer: That would make sense, that's a change I implemented. It was fine before I started fiddling with this file.

Author: Using double quotes is fine IMO, but we should use single quotes if there are double quotes in the text

>   description: "The MQTT topic subscribed to receive birth and <abbr title="last will and testament">LWT</abbr> messages from the MQTT valve device. If an `availability` topic is not defined, the valve availability state will always be `available`. If an `availability` topic is defined, the valve availability state will be `unavailable` by default. Must not be used together with `availability`."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description: "The MQTT topic subscribed to receive birth and LWT messages from the MQTT valve device. If an `availability` topic is not defined, the valve availability state will always be `available`. If an `availability` topic is defined, the valve availability state will be `unavailable` by default. Must not be used together with `availability`."
```

  required: false
  type: string
command_template:
  description: Defines a [template](/docs/configuration/templating/#using-templates-with-the-mqtt-integration) to generate the payload to send to `command_topic`.
  required: false
  type: template
command_topic:
  description: The MQTT topic to publish commands to control the valve. The value sent can be a value defined by `payload_open`, `payload_close` or `payload_stop`. If `reports_position` is set to `true`, a numeric value will be published instead.
  required: false
  type: string
device:

>   description: "Information about the device this valve is a part of to tie it into the [device registry](https://developers.home-assistant.io/docs/en/device_registry_index.html). Only works when [`unique_id`](#unique_id) is set. At least one of identifiers or connections must be present to identify the device."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description: "Information about the device this valve is a part of to tie it into the [device registry](https://developers.home-assistant.io/docs/en/device_registry_index.html). Only works when [`unique_id`](#unique_id) is set. At least one of the identifiers or connections must be present to identify the device."
```
What is meant by "only works"? The device description field is only available or read when the device has a unique ID?

  required: false
  type: map
  keys:
    configuration_url:

>       description: 'A link to the webpage that can manage the configuration of this device. Can be either an `http://`, `https://` or an internal `homeassistant://` URL.'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      description: "A link to the webpage that can manage the configuration of this device. Can be either an `http://`, `https://` or an internal `homeassistant://` URL."
```

      required: false
      type: string
    connections:

>       description: 'A list of connections of the device to the outside world as a list of tuples `[connection_type, connection_identifier]`. For example the MAC address of a network interface: `"connections": [["mac", "02:5b:26:a8:dc:12"]]`.'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      description: 'A list of connections of the device to the outside world as a list of tuples `[connection_type, connection_identifier]`. For example, the MAC address of a network interface: `"connections": [["mac", "02:5b:26:a8:dc:12"]]`.'
```

>       description: "A list of connections of the device to the outside world as a list of tuples `[connection_type, connection_identifier]`. For example, the MAC address of a network interface: `"connections": [["mac", "02:5b:26:a8:dc:12"]]`."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      description: A list of connections of the device to the outside world as a list of tuples `[connection_type, connection_identifier]`. For example, the MAC address of a network interface: `"connections": [["mac", "02:5b:26:a8:dc:12"]]`.
```

>       description: 'A list of connections of the device to the outside world as a list of tuples `[connection_type, connection_identifier]`. For example, the MAC address of a network interface: `"connections": [["mac", "02:5b:26:a8:dc:12"]]`.'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      description: "A list of connections of the device to the outside world as a list of tuples `[connection_type, connection_identifier]`. For example, the MAC address of a network interface: `"connections": [["mac", "02:5b:26:a8:dc:12"]]`."
```

>       description: "A list of connections of the device to the outside world as a list of tuples `[connection_type, connection_identifier]`. For example, the MAC address of a network interface: `"connections": [["mac", "02:5b:26:a8:dc:12"]]`."

Reviewer 2: I think this line is the source of the problem, using multiple `""`

Author: Should use single quotes

      required: false
      type: list
    hw_version:

>       description: "The hardware version of the device."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      description: The hardware version of the device.
```

      required: false
      type: string
    identifiers:

>       description: 'A list of IDs that uniquely identify the device. For example a serial number.'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      description: 'A list of IDs that uniquely identify the device. For example, a serial number.'
```

>       description: 'A list of IDs that uniquely identify the device. For example, a serial number.'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      description: A list of IDs that uniquely identify the device. For example, a serial number.
```

      required: false
      type: [list, string]
    manufacturer:
      description: The manufacturer of the device.
      required: false
      type: string
    model:
      description: The model of the device.
      required: false
      type: string
    name:
      description: The name of the device.
      required: false
      type: string
    suggested_area:

>       description: 'Suggest an area if the device isn’t in one yet.'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      description: Suggest an area if the device isn’t in one yet.
```

      required: false
      type: string
    sw_version:
      description: The firmware version of the device.
      required: false
      type: string
    via_device:

>       description: 'Identifier of a device that routes messages between this device and Home Assistant. Examples of such devices are hubs, or parent devices of a sub-device. This is used to show device topology in Home Assistant.'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      description: Identifier of a device that routes messages between this device and Home Assistant. Examples of such devices are hubs, or parent devices of a sub-device. This is used to show device topology in Home Assistant.
```

      required: false
      type: string
device_class:
  description: Sets the [class of the device](/integrations/valve/), changing the device state and icon that is displayed on the frontend. The `device_class` can be `null`.
  default: None
  required: false
  type: string
enabled_by_default:
  description: Flag which defines if the entity should be enabled when first added.
  required: false
  type: boolean
  default: true
encoding:
  description: The encoding of the payloads received and published messages. Set to `""` to disable decoding of incoming payload.
  required: false
  type: string
  default: "utf-8"
entity_category:

>   description: The [category](https://developers.home-assistant.io/docs/core/entity#generic-properties) of the entity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  description: "The [category](https://developers.home-assistant.io/docs/core/entity#generic-properties) of the entity."
```

  required: false
  type: string
  default: None
icon:
  description: "[Icon](/docs/configuration/customizing-devices/#icon) for the entity."
  required: false
  type: icon
json_attributes_template:

>   description: "Defines a [template](/docs/configuration/templating/#using-templates-with-the-mqtt-integration) to extract the JSON dictionary from messages received on the `json_attributes_topic`. Usage example can be found in [MQTT sensor](/integrations/sensor.mqtt/#json-attributes-template-configuration) documentation."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description: "Defines a [template](/docs/configuration/templating/#using-templates-with-the-mqtt-integration) to extract the JSON dictionary from messages received on the `json_attributes_topic`. A usage example can be found in the [MQTT sensor](/integrations/sensor.mqtt/#json-attributes-template-configuration) documentation."
```

  required: false
  type: template
json_attributes_topic:

>   description: The MQTT topic subscribed to receive a JSON dictionary payload and then set as sensor attributes. Usage example can be found in [MQTT sensor](/integrations/sensor.mqtt/#json-attributes-topic-configuration) documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description: The MQTT topic subscribed to receive a JSON dictionary payload and then set as sensor attributes. A usage example can be found in [MQTT sensor](/integrations/sensor.mqtt/#json-attributes-topic-configuration) documentation.
```

  required: false
  type: string
name:
  description: The name of the valve. Can be set to `null` if only the device name is relevant.
  required: false
  type: string
  default: MQTT valve
object_id:

>   description: Used instead of `name` for automatic generation of `entity_id`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description: Used instead of `name` to have the `entity_id` generated automatically.
```

  required: false
  type: string
optimistic:

>   description: Flag that defines if switch works in optimistic mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description: Flag that defines if a switch works in optimistic mode.
```

  required: false
  type: boolean

>   default: "`false` if state or position topic defined, else `true`."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  default: "`false` if the state or position topic is defined; `true` otherwise."
```

payload_available:
  description: The payload that represents the online state.
  required: false
  type: string
  default: online
payload_close:
  description: The command payload that closes the valve. Is only used when `reports_position` is set to `false` (default). The `payload_close` is not allowed if `reports_position` is set to `true`. Can be set to `null` to disable the valve's close option.
  required: false
  type: string
  default: CLOSE
payload_not_available:
  description: The payload that represents the offline state.
  required: false
  type: string
  default: offline
payload_open:
  description: The command payload that opens the valve. Is only used when `reports_position` is set to `false` (default). The `payload_open` is not allowed if `reports_position` is set to `true`. Can be set to `null` to disable the valve's open option.
  required: false
  type: string
  default: OPEN
payload_stop:

>   description: The command payload that stops the valve. When not configured the valve will not support the `valve.stop` service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description: The command payload that stops the valve. When not configured, the valve will not support the `valve.stop` service.
```

  required: false
  type: string
position_closed:

>   description: Number which represents closed position. The valves position will be scaled to (`position_closed`...`position_open`) range. When a service is called, and scaled back when a value is received.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description: Number which represents closed position. The valve's position will be scaled to the(`position_closed`...`position_open`) range when a service is called and scaled back when a value is received.
```

  required: false
  type: integer
  default: 0
position_open:

>   description: Number which represents open position. The valves position will be scaled to (`position_closed`...`position_open`) range. When a service is called, and scaled back when a value is received.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description: Number which represents open position. The valve's position will be scaled to (`position_closed`...`position_open`) range when a service is called and scaled back when a value is received.
```

  required: false
  type: integer
  default: 100
qos:
  description: The maximum QoS level to be used when receiving and publishing messages.
  required: false
  type: integer
  default: 0
reports_position:

>   description: "Set to `true` if the value reports the position or supports setting the position. Enabling the `reports_position` option will cause the position to be published instead of a payload defined by `payload_open`, `payload_close` or `payload_stop`. When receiving messages `state_topic`, will accept numeric payloads or a state message: `open`, `opening`, `closed`, or `closing`."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description: "Set to `true` if the value reports the position or supports setting the position. Enabling the `reports_position` option will cause the position to be published instead of a payload defined by `payload_open`, `payload_close` or `payload_stop`. When receiving messages, `state_topic` will accept numeric payloads or one of the following state messages: `open`, `opening`, `closed`, or `closing`."
```

  default: open
state_opening:
  description: The payload that represents the opening state.
  required: false
  type: string
  default: opening
state_topic:
  description: The MQTT topic subscribed to receive valve state messages. State topic accepts a state payload (`open`, `opening`, `closed`, or `closing`) or, if `reports_position` is supported, a numeric value representing the position. In a JSON format with variables `state` and `position` both values can received together.
  required: false
  type: string
unique_id:
  description: An ID that uniquely identifies this valve. If two valves have the same unique ID, Home Assistant will raise an exception.
  required: false
  type: string
value_template:
  description: "Defines a [template](/docs/configuration/templating/#using-templates-with-the-mqtt-integration) that can be used to extract the payload for the `state_topic` topic. The rendered value should be a defined state payload or, if reporting a `position` is supported and `reports_position` is set to `true`, a numeric value is expected representing the position. See also `state_topic`."
  required: false
  type: template
{% endconfiguration %}

<div class="note">

> MQTT valve expects position values to be in range of 0 to 100, where 0 indicates closed position and 100 indicates fully open position.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MQTT valve expects position values to be in the range of 0 to 100, where 0 indicates a closed position and 100 indicates a fully open position.
```

> If `position_open` or `position_closed` are set to a different range (e.g. 40 to 140), when sending command to the device the range will be adjusted to the device range (position 0 will send a value of 40 to device) and when position payload is received from the device it will be adjusted back to the 0 to 100 range (device value of 40 will report valve position 0).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `position_open` or `position_closed` are set to a different range (for example, 40 to 140), when sending a command to the device, the range will be adjusted to the device range. For example, position 0 will send a value of 40 to device. When the device receives a position payload, it will be adjusted back to the 0 to 100 range. In our example, the device value of 40 will report valve position 0.
```

> `position_open` and `position_closed` can also be used to reverse the direction of the device, if `position_closed` is set to 100 and `position_open` is set to `0` device operation will be inverted (e.g. when setting position to 40, a value of 60 will be sent to device).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`position_open` and `position_closed` can also be used to reverse the direction of the device: If `position_closed` is set to 100 and `position_open` is set to `0`, the device operation will be inverted. For example, when setting the position to 40, a value of 60 will be sent to the device.
```

</div>

## Examples

> In this section you will find some examples of how to use this platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section provides some examples showing how you can use this platform.
```

        - topic: "home-assistant/valve/availability"
      qos: 0
      reports_position: false
      retain: true
      payload_open: "OPEN"
      payload_close: "CLOSE"
      payload_stop: "STOP"
      state_open: "open"
      state_opening: "opening"
      state_closed: "closed"
      state_closing: "closing"
      payload_available: "online"
      payload_not_available: "offline"
      optimistic: false
      value_template: "{{ value_json.x }}"
```

{% endraw %}

### Sample configuration of a valve that reports the position

The example below shows a sample configuration for a valve that reports the position using JSON messages.

{% raw %}

```yaml
# Example configuration.yaml entry
mqtt:
  - valve:
      name: "MQTT valve"
      command_template: '{"x": {{ value }} }'
      command_topic: "home-assistant/valve/set"
      state_topic: "home-assistant/valve/state"
      availability:
        - topic: "home-assistant/valve/availability"
      reports_position: true
      value_template: "{{ value_json.x }}"
```

{% endraw %}

### Configuration for disabling valve commands

The example below shows a configuration for a valve that does not have a close command.

> Setting `payload_close` empty or to `null` disables the close command and will not show the close button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting the `payload_close` to empty or to `null` disables the close command and will not show the close button.
```

{% raw %}

```yaml
# Example configuration.yaml entry
mqtt:
  - valve:
      payload_open: "on"
      payload_close: 
      payload_stop: "on"
```

{% endraw %}

> An MQTT valve will support `open` and `close` commands if a `command_topic` is set. And `stop` byif `payload_stop` is set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An MQTT valve will support `open` and `close` commands if a `command_topic` is set. The MQTT valve supports `stop` if `payload_stop` is set.
```
